feat(external_dns)!: add OpenMetrics V2 support (#23327)
DataDog/integrations-core: external_dns/README.md

## Overview

> Get real-time metrics from External DNS to visualize and monitor DNS synchronization. Track source and registry records, controller status, and HTTP request latencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Get real-time metrics from External DNS to visualize and monitor DNS synchronization, including source and registry records, controller status, and HTTP request latencies.
```

kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: external-dns
  annotations:
    ad.datadoghq.com/external-dns.checks: |
      {
        "external_dns": {
          "init_config": {},
          "instances": [
            {
              "openmetrics_endpoint": "http://%%host%%:7979/metrics",
              "tags": ["externaldns-pod:%%host%%"]
            }
          ]
        }
      }
  labels:
    name: external-dns
spec:
  containers:
    - name: external-dns
```

To enable the legacy mode of this OpenMetrics-based check, replace `openmetrics_endpoint` with `prometheus_url`:

**Annotations v1** (for Datadog Agent < v7.36)

```yaml
    ad.datadoghq.com/external-dns.instances: |
      [
        {
          "prometheus_url": "http://%%host%%:7979/metrics",
          "tags": ["externaldns-pod:%%host%%"]
        }
      ]
```

**Annotations v2** (for Datadog Agent v7.36 or later)

```yaml
          "instances": [
            {
              "prometheus_url": "http://%%host%%:7979/metrics",
              "tags": ["externaldns-pod:%%host%%"]
            }
          ]
```

**Notes**:

- The shipped `external_dns.d/auto_conf.yaml` file enables the `prometheus_url` option by default for legacy mode.

> - The `externaldns-pod` tag keeps track of the target DNS pod IP. The other tags are related to the Datadog Agent that is polling the information using the service discovery.

Reviewer: Datadog's feature is *Autodiscovery* (one word, capital A) — the same paragraph above already uses "Autodiscovery Integration Templates" correctly. "the service discovery" is inconsistent and reads as awkward English.

```suggestion
- The `externaldns-pod` tag keeps track of the target DNS pod IP. The other tags are related to the Datadog Agent that is polling the information using Autodiscovery.
```

> - For Deployments, add the annotations to the metadata of the template's specifications. Do not add them at the outer specification level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For Deployments, add the annotations to the metadata of the template's specification. Do not add them at the outer specification level.
```

### Validation

[Run the Agent's `status` subcommand][4] and look for `external_dns` under the Checks section.

## Data Collected

### Metrics

See [metadata.csv][5] for a list of metrics provided by this integration.

The latest mode submits the `.sum` and `.count` summary samples as `monotonic_count` type. In legacy mode, these are submitted as `gauge` type.

#### Metric type differences between integration modes

The integration supports two modes that handle Prometheus metric types differently:

| Prometheus Type | Legacy mode (`prometheus_url`) | Latest mode (`openmetrics_endpoint`) |
|-----------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| gauge | gauge | gauge |
| counter | gauge (raw value) | monotonic_count (delta between scrapes) |
| summary.quantile | gauge | gauge |
| summary.sum | gauge | monotonic_count |
| summary.count | gauge | monotonic_count |

> **Notes:**:

Reviewer: Same `**Notes**:` formatting issue from the previous review — colon should be outside the bold, not duplicated. Looks like the fix was applied to the first occurrence (line 109) but a new instance was introduced here.

```suggestion
**Notes**:
```

## Overview

Get real-time metrics from external-dns to visualize and monitor DNS synchronization. Track source and registry records, controller status, and HTTP request latencies.

For more information about external-dns, see the [GitHub repo][1].

**Minimum Agent version:** 7.17.0

## Setup

> Starting with version 7.0.0, this OpenMetrics-based integration has a latest mode (enabled by setting `openmetrics_endpoint` to point to the target endpoint) and a legacy mode (enabled by setting `prometheus_url` instead). To get all the most up-to-date features, Datadog recommends enabling the latest mode. For more information, see [Latest and Legacy Versioning For OpenMetrics-based Integrations][11].

Reviewer: "To get all the most up-to-date features" is awkward — "all" and "most" are redundant together.

```suggestion
Starting with version 7.0.0, this OpenMetrics-based integration has a latest mode (enabled by setting `openmetrics_endpoint` to point to the target endpoint) and a legacy mode (enabled by setting `prometheus_url` instead). For the latest features, Datadog recommends enabling the latest mode. For more information, see [Latest and Legacy Versioning For OpenMetrics-based Integrations][11].
```

Author: it's applied

> Starting with version 7.0.0, this OpenMetrics-based integration has a latest mode (enabled by setting `openmetrics_endpoint` to point to the target endpoint) and a legacy mode (enabled by setting `prometheus_url` instead). To get all the most up-to-date features, Datadog recommends enabling the latest mode. For more information, see [Latest and Legacy Versioning For OpenMetrics-based Integrations][11].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting with version 7.0.0, this OpenMetrics-based integration has a latest mode (enabled by setting `openmetrics_endpoint` to the target endpoint) and a legacy mode (enabled by setting `prometheus_url`). To get all the most up-to-date features, Datadog recommends enabling the latest mode. For more information, see [Latest and Legacy Versioning For OpenMetrics-based Integrations][11].
```

Author: it's applied

> The latest mode of the External DNS check requires Python 3 and submits the `.sum` and `.count` summary samples as monotonic count type. These metrics were previously submitted as `gauge` type in the legacy mode. See the [`metadata.csv` file][5] for a list of metrics available in each mode.

Reviewer: The Datadog metric type name is `monotonic_count` (underscore, code-formatted).

```suggestion
The latest mode of the External DNS check requires Python 3 and submits the `.sum` and `.count` summary samples as `monotonic_count` type. These metrics were previously submitted as `gauge` type in the legacy mode. See the [`metadata.csv` file][5] for a list of metrics available in each mode.
```

Author: it's applied

> The latest mode of the External DNS check requires Python 3 and submits the `.sum` and `.count` summary samples as monotonic count type. These metrics were previously submitted as `gauge` type in the legacy mode. See the [`metadata.csv` file][5] for a list of metrics available in each mode.

Reviewer: Remove the Python 3 requirement (moving it to Prerequisites) and reframe the metric type difference as present-tense mode behavior rather than a before/after description.

```suggestion
The latest mode of the External DNS check submits the `.sum` and `.count` summary samples as `monotonic_count` type. In legacy mode, these are submitted as `gauge` type. See the [`metadata.csv` file][5] for a list of metrics available in each mode.
```

Author: it's applied

> For hosts unable to use Python 3, or if you previously implemented this integration mode, see the `legacy` mode [configuration example][12]. For Autodiscovery users relying on the `external_dns.d/auto_conf.yaml` file, this file enables the `prometheus_url` option for the `legacy` mode of the check by default. See the sample [external_dns.d/auto_conf.yaml][13] for the default configuration options and the sample [external_dns.d/conf.yaml.example][3] for all available configuration options.

Reviewer: "this integration mode" is ambiguous. Clarify which mode is meant.

```suggestion
For hosts unable to use Python 3, or if you previously enabled the legacy mode, see the `legacy` mode [configuration example][12]. For Autodiscovery users relying on the `external_dns.d/auto_conf.yaml` file, this file enables the `prometheus_url` option for the `legacy` mode of the check by default. See the sample [external_dns.d/auto_conf.yaml][13] for the default configuration options and the sample [external_dns.d/conf.yaml.example][3] for all available configuration options.
```

Author: it's applied

> For hosts unable to use Python 3, or if you previously implemented this integration mode, see the `legacy` mode [configuration example][12]. For Autodiscovery users relying on the `external_dns.d/auto_conf.yaml` file, this file enables the `prometheus_url` option for the `legacy` mode of the check by default. See the sample [external_dns.d/auto_conf.yaml][13] for the default configuration options and the sample [external_dns.d/conf.yaml.example][3] for all available configuration options.

Reviewer: The Setup intro is doing a lot of work before the user reaches any subsection heading. Consider tightening the structure:

- **Setup intro**: one short paragraph covering the two modes and the Datadog recommendation. Link to the versioning guide. Nothing else.
- **Prerequisites**: Python 3 requirement (latest mode) + the `--metrics-address` flag note.
- **Configuration**: move the legacy mode config pointer here ("if Python 3 is unavailable, see the legacy configuration example") as a note at the top of the section, where it's directly relevant to which config example to follow.

The third paragraph (line 17) chains four separate ideas together and is the hardest to parse. That content belongs in Configuration, not in the intro.

Author: Thank you for proofreading this.

### Prerequisites

> Ensure external-dns is configured to expose Prometheus metrics by setting the `--metrics-address` flag (default: `:7979`).

Reviewer: "Ensure" should be avoided per the style guide. Recasting as a direct imperative is cleaner.

```suggestion
Configure external-dns to expose Prometheus metrics by setting the `--metrics-address` flag (default: `:7979`).
```

Author: it's applied

> 

Reviewer: Add the Python 3 requirement here so users see it before configuring.

```suggestion
Configure external-dns to expose Prometheus metrics by setting the `--metrics-address` flag (default: `:7979`).

The latest mode requires Python 3. For hosts unable to use Python 3, use the legacy mode.
```

Author: it's applied

### Installation

> The External DNS check is included in the [Datadog Agent][2] package, so you don't need to install anything else on your servers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The External DNS check is included in the [Datadog Agent][2] package. You do not need to install anything else on your servers.
```

Author: it's applied

### Configuration
<!-- xxx tabs xxx -->
<!-- xxx tab "Docker" xxx -->
#### Docker

To configure this check for an Agent running on a container:

##### Metric collection

Set [Autodiscovery Integration Templates][8] as Docker labels on your application container:

```yaml
LABEL "com.datadoghq.ad.check_names"='["external_dns"]'
LABEL "com.datadoghq.ad.init_configs"='[{}]'
LABEL "com.datadoghq.ad.instances"='[{"openmetrics_endpoint":"http://%%host%%:7979/metrics", "tags":["externaldns-pod:%%host%%"]}]'
```

To enable the legacy mode of this OpenMetrics-based check, replace `openmetrics_endpoint` with `prometheus_url`:

```yaml
LABEL "com.datadoghq.ad.instances"='[{"prometheus_url":"http://%%host%%:7979/metrics", "tags":["externaldns-pod:%%host%%"]}]'
```

<!-- xxz tab xxx -->
<!-- xxx tab "Kubernetes" xxx -->

#### Kubernetes

To configure this check for an Agent running on Kubernetes:

##### Metric collection

> Set [Autodiscovery Integrations Templates][9] as pod annotations on your application container. Alternatively, you can configure templates with a [file, configmap, or key-value store][10].

Reviewer: Typo: "Integrations Templates" should be "Integration Templates" (singular) — consistent with the Docker section above.

```suggestion
Set [Autodiscovery Integration Templates][9] as pod annotations on your application container. Alternatively, you can configure templates with a [file, configmap, or key-value store][10].
```

Author: it's applied

            {
              "openmetrics_endpoint": "http://%%host%%:7979/metrics",
              "tags": ["externaldns-pod:%%host%%"]
            }
          ]
        }
      }
  labels:
    name: external-dns
spec:
  containers:
    - name: external-dns
```

To enable the legacy mode of this OpenMetrics-based check, replace `openmetrics_endpoint` with `prometheus_url`:

**Annotations v1** (for Datadog Agent < v7.36)

```yaml
    ad.datadoghq.com/external-dns.instances: |
      [
        {
          "prometheus_url": "http://%%host%%:7979/metrics",
          "tags": ["externaldns-pod:%%host%%"]
        }
      ]
```

**Annotations v2** (for Datadog Agent v7.36 or later)

```yaml
          "instances": [
            {
              "prometheus_url": "http://%%host%%:7979/metrics",
              "tags": ["externaldns-pod:%%host%%"]
            }
          ]
```

**Notes**:

- The shipped `external_dns.d/auto_conf.yaml` file enables the `prometheus_url` option by default for legacy mode.
- The `externaldns-pod` tag keeps track of the target DNS pod IP. The other tags are related to the Datadog Agent that is polling the information using the service discovery.

> - For Deployments, add the annotations to the metadata of the template's specifications. Do not add it at the outer specification level.

Reviewer: "it" doesn't agree in number with "annotations" (plural) and is ambiguous.

```suggestion
- For Deployments, add the annotations to the metadata of the template's specifications. Do not add them at the outer specification level.
```

Author: it's applied

<!-- xxz tab xxx -->
<!-- xxz tabs xxx -->

### Validation

[Run the Agent's `status` subcommand][4] and look for `external_dns` under the Checks section.

## Data Collected

### Metrics

See [metadata.csv][5] for a list of metrics provided by this integration.

#### Metric type differences between integration modes

The integration supports two modes that handle Prometheus metric types differently:

| Prometheus Type | Legacy mode (`prometheus_url`) | Latest mode (`openmetrics_endpoint`) |
|-----------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| gauge | gauge | gauge |
| counter | gauge (raw value) | monotonic_count (delta between scrapes) |
| summary.quantile | gauge | gauge |
| summary.sum | gauge | monotonic_count |
| summary.count | gauge | monotonic_count |

> **Notes:**

Reviewer: Inconsistent formatting: line 137 uses `**Notes**:` (colon outside bold), but this line uses `**Notes:**` (colon inside bold). Per style guide, bold the term, not the colon.

```suggestion
**Notes**:
```

Author: it's applied

- Counter metrics with zero values are not emitted by the latest mode on the first scrape (requires a delta > 0)
- The `metadata.csv` reflects the latest mode behavior as the reference

> - The `host` label from `http_request_duration_seconds` is automatically renamed to `http_host` to avoid conflicts with Datadog's reserved tags

Reviewer: All three items are complete sentences and require end periods per the style guide.

```suggestion
- Counter metrics with zero values are not emitted by the latest mode on the first scrape (requires a delta > 0).
- The `metadata.csv` reflects the latest mode behavior as the reference.
- The `host` label from `http_request_duration_seconds` is automatically renamed to `http_host` to avoid conflicts with Datadog's reserved tags.
```

Author: it's applied

#### External-dns version differences

> The integration supports both old and new external-dns metric formats:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The integration supports the following external-dns metric formats:
```

Author: it's applied
